# Kickstart library tutorial

Kickstart is intended to ease the way for beginners in C++, and helps to shorten example code for those who help others on the net.

## 1. Installation & compiler requirements.

All you need to do is download, copy and rename, so that the compiler finds the `<kickstart/`&hellip;`>` headers. There is no need to compile the library on its own. All the library code is in headers that you just `#include`.

Installation is described in more detail in [a separate document](../../source/examples/hello-world.md).

Then after installation, to use Kickstart you need to use a compiler option that specifies at least ***C++17***. Also, the Kickstart i/o functionality requires that C++ strings are UTF-8 encoded, which they’re not by default with the 2019 version of Microsoft’s Visual C++ compiler, and the Kickstart code uses the alternate keywords `and`, `or` and `not`, which again are a problem with Visual C++. Recommended options to guide the compilers:

| *Compiler:* | *Recommended core options:* |
|-|-|
| g++ &amp; clang | `-std=c++17` `-pedantic-errors` `-Wall` |
| Visual C++ | `/nologo` `/utf-8` `/EHsc` `/GR` `/permissive-` `/FI"iso646.h"` `/std:c++17` `/Zc:__cplusplus` `/W4` `/wd4459` `/D` `_CRT_SECURE_NO_WARNINGS` `/D` `_STL_SECURE_NO_WARNINGS` |

Happily, for Visual C++ options can be specified in environment variable `CL`, which is used automatically.


## 2. Simple text i/o.

### 2.1. Output of non-English letters like Norwegian ÆØÅ.

Pretend that you’re a Norwegian student named Bjørn Håvard Sæther. You want to write a portable C++ program that displays your name, whether you compile and run it in Linux or in Windows. That’s easy with Kickstart:

*File ([dear-world.cpp](examples/dear-world.cpp)):*
~~~cpp
#include <kickstart/all.hpp>
using namespace kickstart::all;

auto main() -> int
{
    out << "Dear world, Bjørn Håvard Sæther says hello!" << endl;
}
~~~

Building and running in an ordinary Windows console window:

> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***cl dear-world.cpp /Feb***  
> dear-world.cpp
> 
> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***b***  
> Dear world, Bjørn Håvard Sæther says hello!

Works! 😃

The **`cl`** command invokes the Visual C++ 2019 compiler, and option `/Feb` tells it to produce an executable called `b.exe`, which can then be invoked with command `b`.

---

Here’s code that ideally should do the same, but using the C++ standard library directly:

*File ([dear-world.stdlib.cpp](examples/dear-world.stdlib.cpp)):*
~~~cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

auto main() -> int
{
    cout << "Dear world, Bjørn Håvard Sæther says hello!" << endl;
}
~~~

Namespace `std` has a much higher chance of introducing name collisions (e.g. for the name `distance`) than the `kickstart::all` namespace, and so many consider `using namespace std;` a bad practice. A `using namespace std;` generally saves work for a small program like this but it can lead to much unnecessary work in a larger system, so it should only be used with due (intelligent) consideration. Especially a `using namespace std;` in the global namespace in a header, should be avoided.

Anyway, the default standard-library result in a Windows console is ungood:

> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***cl dear-world.stdlib.cpp /Fe"bs"***  
> dear-world.stdlib.cpp  
> 
> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***bs***  
> Dear world, Bj├©rn H├Ñvard S├ªther says hello!

The gobbledygook appears because the console expects a different text encoding than UTF-8, and because *the Visual C++ standard library implementation does not address that issue*.

This is so also with the other common Windows compilers. The Windows C++ standard library implementations could have done the same as Kickstart, with Just Works&trade; behavior, but they don’t. Presumably that common misbehavior is due to common *reuse* of a core of flawed functionality in Microsoft’s C runtime library.

---

Which encoding a Windows console expects, varies, but on the author’s system the default is Windows **codepage** 850, which is a Scandinavian variant of the original IBM PC text encoding. When the console is instructed to instead expect codepage 65001, UTF-8, the standard library output is presented correctly:

> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***chcp & bs***  
> Active code page: 850  
> Dear world, Bj├©rn H├Ñvard S├ªther says hello!
> 
> [C:\my\dev\libraries\kickstart-1\documentation\tutorial\examples]  
> \> ***chcp 65001 & bs***  
> Active code page: 65001  
> Dear world, Bjørn Håvard Sæther says hello!

Here the **`chcp`** command, short for *change codepage*, reports and changes which codepage the console should assume, its “active codepage”.

Summing up so far, using Kickstart for simple output …

* has much less chance of name collision for the common `using namespace` technique;
* presents e.g. Norwegian characters correctly *by default*; and
* gives correct text presentation even when `chcp` can't be used, e.g. when the program is run from an IDE.

Also, the typesafe Kickstart `out <<` delegates the work to fastish `printf`, not to the fat & slow C++ `std::cout` iostream, so using Kickstart can yield faster output (although that doesn’t matter much for console output) and, at least in a future version of the library with all iostreams dependencies removed, it can yield a smaller executable.

